of Dolan Hill in 1950 to Papa Nicola in
1960 right some of that connection is
scientific once in a while the
connection is Happ might read J Hood's
paper right so it becomes a connection
in the sense that he quotes that paper
but some of the connections are are even
more how does one move then from Pap
Nicholas we're discussing prevention and
screening how does one moved from Papa
Nicola's work to um to the uh to stx's
work from theography right the way that
I'm moving the book is in fact they
happen to be again move in physical
space in that case uh happening Cloud
work is happening on the East River in
the 60s and if you walk if you were to
walk about few blocks west you would
come to the place where Strax placed his
first van for mography in on
alongside um because women uh he wanted
to get wanted to capture women obviously
um and
uh women wouldn't travel because when
they were working women they wouldn't
travel Uptown to clinics so he decided
to outfit a van uh to put a mography
machine this is like the mountain in
Muhammad right he put machine inside a
van and he parked it outside Central
Park so that women during their office
breaks could come and just get their
mogs done um and so the connection in
that case to move from tapa nca's vision
of cervical cancer screening to the
Contemporary vision of breast cancer
screening really occurs in physical and
you know when you read the book you you
figure out what I'm talking all these
little kind of Linings that how
arbitrary are you in your research of
being self-conscious and knowing you're
going to need you know this bit of
connective tissue that little bit of
connective tissue I need to go find
something that physically links these
things uh I better go back to the
archive I better go look at or I mean
sometimes it's sometimes it's obvious
but very key narrative oh very very key
narrative they're the hardest to do
actually um sometimes sometimes it were
obvious as I said sometimes someone read
someone's paper and really was
responding to something know science is
a conversation it's a that's what's
that's what makes it that's what makes
our life easier right um I I write in a
book somewhere I say you know scientists
are more interested historians because
everything that we do is is is is a
reply to someone else every time I write
a paper I'm really writing back to
someone in my P right this is this is
part of the grand you know we take it
very lightly but it's amazing that in
fact we're having a Rand conversation
which has gone on for about you know 600
700 years um we're writing back to
someone who's a generation behind us or
Etc but anyway so sometimes it's easy
because you know you someone's reading
someone's work and you reply to
someone's work but sometimes not so easy
sometimes you don't know why on Earth
you move
from one vision of screening for
instance to another and then you have to
find then you have to really go and try
to find something that acts as a spark
between one and the other that's very
hard to that for me was very I I want to
ask kind of a tone and structure
question here um and uh uh I'm trying to
think how to how to open this particular
box um you know there's a there's a as
as you alluded at the beginning you go
to any bookstore there's a huge section
Dev cancer much of it is prescriptive to
be sure you know um cure this
but quite a lot of it is is in rose out
of that Mary laser tradition which is
this sort of
relentlessly um uh optimistic
relentlessly propagandistic
relentlessly um forward into the future
toward the Big C cure tone weak history
of cancer yes um what you do in this
book is interesting each of these
sections actually is remarkably
pessimistic they s almost sort of the
story of a of a of a research uh that
has moved forward only by kind of
falling over I mean yet the overall
picture somehow still ends up being
optimistic I'm still trying to figure
out how you pulled that off I mean it
was not conscious but I what I wanted to
what I wanted to achieve as I said was a
a kind
of maybe it's it's not the best word but
a kind of scholarly perspective on on
what happened U and often you know can
the
the this discovery process like many has
been very cartisan you really had to
Tumble to the bottom
of the the slope in order to climb
ourselves back out again right so that
was that really is the structure of the
book you start off with this huge
optimism at some point of time in the
1950s 1960s and then you keep falling
and you keep falling and you keep
falling falling fall you reach the mid
1980s and you do this in the abstract I
mean put yourself in the in the position
of the woman getting not radical
mastectomy but radical chemotherapy in
1984 you know Maggie jenss who says who
writes very Point she says um it was
like being thrown out of a jumbo jet
without a parachute um uh and you know
very beautiful passage in her book The
pamplet Very moved me particularly he
said um you know there you are you're
sleeping you're on a transcontinent
flight fast asleep and someone comes and
says hello Mrs Jens wake up wake up wake
up the door is open and now you go go
now and and there she is and she's
bewildered and she's falling out of the
plan and she says to herself what word
am I inhabiting so that's just an
example of of how bewildering it was to
inhabit the the world of cancer that
continues to be many reasons um what I'm
trying to say here is that the um
the the the structure of the book um had
to take into account the fact that this
is not a LM
history yeah this is a history that will
have five steps backwards to go three
steps forwards and and we as readers
have to be sophisticated as science
readers but as readers of anything as
readers of any any form of fiction or
non-fiction have to be sophisticated
enough to be able to contend with that
we might we should be able to be go to
to go three step sideways we should be
able to respect each other as readers to
be able to go three steps sideways
knowing that that will ultimately lead
to four steps sideways again maybe you
know this is a this is a discursive
process it's a narrative process um
history particular The History of
Science doesn't happen anyone who spent
one nanc in laboratory knows but the
history of science doesn't happen such
that you know one bit of progress is
piled on to another bit of progress like
building a Lego uh that's not what
happens um we take steps backward steps
forward steps sideways those are
important and those are played out and
this is what's crucial they are played
out in the lives of human beings um you
know
um these trials rode on the backs of
hundreds of thousands of patients um and
so it would be a it would be a peculiar
falsity um and it would go against the
brain and the tone of his book to write
a wig history of cancer um it would be
it would be just what I wanted not to do
what kind of response now as a popular
matter of the book has gotten enormous
ously favorable perception but I'm
wondering what the response from within
the medical community um has been um
there's you know a famous track record
of scientists who um do have some knack
for reaching out to public to
communicate uh find themselves uh uh
criticized by their peers for unseenly
Behavior there's some famous examples of
this but I'm just curious if that's so
to some extent of course you know this
this is not I hope this is not that kind
of book uh uh in the sense that you know
again I didn't have this doesn't have a
again this goes back to this idea of me
not being an expert um I didn't have a
an that particular kind of ego agenda to
fulfill so I didn't get that kind of
response but that said that the response
has been extraordinary generous reviews
in landet in nature medicine have been
just as generous as the reviews in you
know in in other places and so the
response has been just extraordinary
generous one thing I I did one thing I
did do in the book is you know and
there's a big disclaimer up front is
actually I was not terribly interested
part of the reason being that I was not
interested in writing this big history
um of saying you know he discovered or
she discovered something or the other
and then this was followed by that
discovery of something the blah blah
blah blah blah blah um instead I I Chang
I hope I changed the focus of the the
patients um every time there's a story
in the book A major Discovery in the
book that Discovery is pinned on a human
being and and I try to get in I try to
discover these people you know try to
find who the longest term Survivor of of
leukemia chemotherapy is who is the
longest term Survivor or decept these
people should be I think icons in our
our history these people change the way
we imagine the word we imagine medicine
um so by doing that also I sort of
almost decapitated the the the monster
of scientific rivalry at its face I said
you know this book is not about I'm not
going to write this book about who
discovered something first um I would
try to tell the story to the best of my
ability but there's a process within
science that
rewards um and
there's a whole discursive process of
rewards who discover what first and
scientists can figur that out my real
interest is you know who's Barbara
Bradfield um who is Robert Sandler um
who is Ella the woman that you know
survives the first the first really
intensive Dr what where is she today
what happens to her tomorrow um and by
doing so by Shifting the focus um what I
was trying to say is that you know
medical history could be written Through
The Eyes of
uh scientists and doctors to me that's
I'm not interested in that I'm more
interested in the medical history that
is written or could be written from the
from the from the eyes of people who
encounter it the most proximately to me
their stories are more interesting um
and and whenever as I said whenever I
was stuck I I I definely had two
solutions when I was stuck when I was
stuck in this book my two solutions were
go to the place or find the person um
and um and every time this happened you
know writing what percep the Discover
and I was writing about the laboratory
etc etc and I said to myself where is
you know where is the woman who was
being treated uh I was writing about
leukemia and I told the story elsewhere
um um I had to travel 6,000 miles
through a series of accidents to find
the child to whom this book was
dedicated um through a series of
accidents um I told the story elsewhere
so
um you know to me that was more
interesting than telling a story of
great discoveries by
great few things few
medical as thoroughly and obsessively
covered in the General Media is cancer
cancer treatment and the possibilities
of cancer cures cancer pharmaceutical um
I'm sort of wondering from your
perspective both as a as a as an
oncologist and as a practitioner but
also as a someone who's who's displayed
some some skill writing about this to
the general public what what
that coverage looks like to you what are
it flaws what are it
virtues well I think one of the
questions that is uh there's an over
granularity in it uh over granularity
you feel as if you you're losing the the
uh forest for the trees if you simply
looking so in other words you there is
an obsessive quality in which every
footstep forward backward sideways is
covered leaving open the question what's
the real what's the real differ in in in
science we often make a distinction
between statistically significant and
biologically meaningful so in other
words you know you might have a
phenomenal that's different between this
and this and if you sample it enough
times you can make it statistically
significant but the this difference
might not be biologically meaningful so
there are many things that are
so what you're really trying to do in
biology as a scientist I think is trying
to get to what is biologically
meaningful statistics are allows you to
generate um confidence confidence
against
biases um that prevent us from having
conversations about science that's what
the role of Statistics is right it
allows us to have a conversation about
science where you and I can have a have
that conversation without indulging in a
certain series of very traditional human
psychological uh percept perceptual
biases right but but the biological
meaning of something has very little to
do with Statistics it has to do with the
nature of the universe it has to do with
truth it has to do with truth telling it
has to do with whether one medicine is
really changes the way we live longer we
live better we need more dignified lives
that's the real biological meaning um
and I think that's what's lost to me
when I read a newspaper article I'm
saying you know this curve showed some
increase and it was statistically
significant who cares if it's
statistically significant or not right
to me what I'm looking for is as and I'm
talking about as a scientist I'm saying
to myself what was it was it meaningful
I mean was it meaningful so just to give
you an example some drug comes along and
extends the life of someone by 6 months
and asking to myself is that meaningful
I don't mean that in a condescending way
is it meaningful in the history of this
drug in the history of this disease
where has that moved us uh you know in
melanoma we have this new drug this
immunological therapy which is
successful in it was just approved by
the FDA 2 weeks ago right and it shows
an increase in metastatic metic melanoma
of about 6 to 8 months um of increased
survival in patients who PR this drug
and so the question when I'm reading
this I'm asking myself well tell us a
little bit about the history of failed
drugs against Mela tell us a little bit
about why this is important and the
answer is this this idea of Awakening
the immune system against cancer was
really a a dead field it was it was so
dead that no scientist would touch it
and so really this drug awakens a dead
field to me more interesting than than
than you
know the more minor
totic the fact that melanoma was a
disease metastatic melanoma there was no
drug in the history of all chemicals
that were ever tried that had changed
the survival of patients with metastatic
melanoma so I'm going to repeat that
because it's so important there was no
drug in the history of metastatic
melanoma that in a randomized trial to
my knowledge had increased the lifespan
of a patient um that's why this drug is
important because it proves a principle
it begins it opens a new story um now to
me that's all of this is very important
reading an article about how someone's
life was increased by 6 months I'm not
so
impressed so you think there's a a
misplaced focus on there's a misplaced
focus on what progress means there's a
misplaced understanding of what is what
is forward what is backwards um is a
misunderstanding of again